
So today I'll be talking about `multimedia`. It stands for multimodal mediation analysis. There are many packages or many algorithms for doing mediation analysis and causal inference. The purpose of this package is to kind of make it a little bit easier to swap in and out different algorithms. So instead of proposing a new algorithm—I'm not going to be talking about any new algorithms here—I'm going to be talking about how you can wrap together many different kinds of algorithms into a kind of integrated mediation analysis pipeline.

In the first half, I'll give a brief introduction, just what is mediation analysis in causal inference. And then the last part, I want to give an illustration with some omics data.

Mediation analysis was originally developed in political science, social science, but now there's a lot of interest in biostatistics and high-dimensional biology. And the reason that there's this sort of interest: you want to go beyond just treatment and an effect. In mediation analysis, we want to see, when you see an effect, why did it happen? Right? Are there any mediating variables that might be responsible for the effects that we see downstream of a treatment? And this is very important in biology.

One of my favorite examples is you give people chemotherapy treatments. Some people have very adverse effects. Other people don't have as adverse effects. Right? And one thing people now know is that the microbiome is a mediator for a lot of those downstream effects. Depending on the kind of gut bacteria you have, how you respond to chemotherapy might be a very poor response, or like very bad side effects, or not. And this is really important clinically because if you have very bad side effects, you can't be given as high a dosage, you can't be given as strong a treatment. And so being able to understand that mediating variable is important here.

A little bit more abstractly, we think often in these terms, these kinds of diagrams. So T is the treatment or the exposure. Y is the outcome they're interested in. M, this is the mediating variable. Imagine that the treatment can affect the outcome. It could be going through this mediating variable. There could be lots of other factors that are changing too. Those could be going directly, kind of bypassing the mediating variable. We might also want to control for a lot of unchanging factors, right? So there might be factors that affect both the mediator and the response that are not really related to the treatment. You want to just control for X.

So this diagram, this is a mediation analysis diagram. How would you fit this kind of model? One approach, maybe the most straightforward approach, is just do two linear regression models. So the first model is the mediation model. The second model is an outcome model. In the first one, you look at: how do the control variables X and your treatment, how do those affect the mediator? Second one: how does treatment, the mediator, and these control variables influence the results? Right? So these are just putting coefficients on these paths. So M has T and X going in. Y has M, T, and X going in. The thing people are often interested in is this alpha transpose beta. It's from the treatment to the mediator, then the mediator to the response. It's exactly that effect that's traveling through the mediator. Okay.

But what if you want to go beyond linear regression? Right? In a lot of omics applications, you could try to transform the data so that a linear model is close. But in a lot of settings, it's hard to actually transform it exactly. So we might want to work with a count model. We might want to work with some sort of nonlinear model. How can we do this sort of analysis with a nonlinear model? I have equations in my backup slides if we want to get into more detail, but I'm going to see if I can explain this in a picture.

So this is how I think of mediation analysis, nonlinear mediation analysis, in a picture. The x-axis is a mediator. The y-axis is the response. Think of red as the value of the outcome when you're treated. Y is the value of the outcome under the control. Think of these as all counterfactual values, right? You never actually observe the person under both the treatment and control. But you can imagine the kind of counterfactual curve: what they would have gotten under that value of the mediator, under that value of the treatment.

A direct effect is, for a fixed value of the mediator, do you have any difference in your outcome? That vertical gap, that is the direct effect. When you talk about the kind of average direct effect, it's just averaging the vertical gaps across this curve. What is an indirect effect here? There's actually no direct effect for any given value of the mediator. There's no difference between treatment and control. But what's happening conceptually is this treatment is increasing the typical value of the mediator. The typical value of the mediator under the control is this greenish one. The purple is the typical value of the mediator under the treatment. And since the mediator value tends to get increased under the treatment, then the outcome also tends to increase. So the treatment is changing the response, and it's traveling through that change in the mediator. That's what people mean when they say an indirect effect.

And this is how you would kind of make it formal with a nonlinear model. This is a nonlinear curve. But if you can predict these sort of counterfactuals, these nonlinear counterfactuals, then you can use this logic to estimate the indirect effect. And in practice, we often have both direct and indirect effects. Kind of the art of mediation analysis is trying to attribute any treatment effect you saw to these different paths. How much of it came through different mediators? How much of it can you not explain? And therefore, you're going to relegate it to some direct effect.

One of the things that we prioritized in our package is we wanted to make sure that you could have both high-dimensional mediators and outcomes. Because in the kind of omics we care about, you might have, say, a high-dimensional microbiome dataset, you might have a high-dimensional metabolome dataset. We want to see how these are influencing each other in some path. So all I'm doing is I'm taking that same diagram from before, but instead of going to a single outcome, it goes to multiple outcomes.

So how did we design this package? A lot of our inspiration came from the `mediation` package. This is from Kosuke Imai's group in social science, political science, that is doing a univariate mediation analysis. So let's just review what does that all look like for univariate mediation analysis? It's just the same linear regression from before, but everything is univariate, right? So you have T as the one-dimensional treatment, a one-dimensional mediator, and a one-dimensional outcome. The indirect effect here is actually just the product of the alpha and beta coefficients from these two linear models.

So let's think design pattern. How do you think of the design pattern here? One thing you could have done is to write a function that takes the input data (response, mediator, treatment) and then computes that alpha-beta product, and returns that alpha-beta product as the outcome of the function. Okay, there's one thing you could do. This is not the design that the `mediation` package did, though. I thought they did something super clever. Instead of just taking the raw data, they take `lm` objects, or actually just modeling objects. Because if you think back to that counterfactual picture I gave, all you need are the predictions of the counterfactuals under the mediator and treatment values. You don't actually need the parameters. You just need those predicted curves, and then you can estimate direct and indirect effects.

So that's what they do. Since you have `predict` methods for both of these `lm` objects, you can estimate the direct and indirect effects for those `lm` objects without actually having to access the coefficients, right? And this means their package works with not just `lm`, it also works with `glm`, right? You can use logistic, you can use Poisson. This is the advantage of this sort of nonlinear, nonparametric kind of thing. You just pass in the mediation model and the outcome model, and once you pass in the mediation and the outcome model, you can calculate all these effects downstream.

So all we're doing is adapting that idea to high-dimensional mediation models and high-dimensional outcome models. So instead of just `glm`, you can pass in a few different kinds of higher-dimensional models. We'll see an extended example soon, but here I just wanted to illustrate like LNM—this is a logistic normal multinomial model. This is a really common compositional model for microbiome data. So now we can model the microbiome as some kind of compositional mediator here. This is actually just a ridge regression on the outcome, right? So the point is, our package is allowing us to substitute different kinds of models for the mediation model and the outcome model.

Here are the kinds of models that we have implemented right now. LNM, this is a compositional model. A lot of my background is microbiome, so I wanted to make sure that's there. `glmnet`—it's a wrapper for `glmnet`. We just fit it separately for every single node, right? So if you have many outcomes, you can fit a separate `glmnet` for each of those outcomes. Random forest for nonlinearity, and we also have a wrapper for `brms`. This is helpful for sparse modeling.

So how do you assess uncertainty here? We don't have access to the parameters anymore, right? We're not in the linear model setting where you know that this product of the coefficients is the indirect effect. So you can't just use the usual kind of parametric analysis to get p-values, right? But we still can run a bootstrap, and this is what the `mediation` package does, and we also adapt it here. So we have bootstrap for uncertainty, but if you need p-values, our package unfortunately won't give that.

We do support sensitivity analysis. So I haven't gone through the identification assumptions—I have this as backup slides in case you're curious. You need certain kinds of, they call it, ignorability assumptions. It is basically like you can't treat people who were going to respond anyways, right? That's going to invalidate your inferences. You can't test those assumptions with data. Like, you can't know whether ignorability is satisfied just by looking at your dataset, but you can test how robust your conclusions are if those assumptions had been violated. So that's the whole idea of sensitivity analysis. And we have this example where there's a confounder between the outcome and the mediator. So we just simulate where we have some correlated error, and the correlated error between the mediator and outcome models serves as seeing how, if you simulate without confounding, how do your effects change. We can report that. Okay.

In the last few minutes, I want to give a running extended example. I reanalyzed a dataset from this study of inflammatory bowel disease. It's coming from the curated metabolome microbiome repository. This is a really nice resource. Everything's pre-processed the same way. If you're interested in data integration, it's a really good package. 220 patients. They get data about the microbiome, so just think of counts of all the different bacteria, and they have untargeted metabolomics. This means they just go in and try to gather all the different kind of small molecule abundances that they can. Some of the people are healthy, and there are two different disease groups within IBD. So you'll see two colors for the different disease groups.

For pre-processing, I wanted things to run fast, so I just pre-processed it so I can use `glmnet` linear models. I applied a compositional transform, log transform for the metabolome. I'm going to treat the microbiome as the mediator, the metabolome as the outcome. So think of any change in the metabolome from this disease versus healthy groups: I want to see how much of that change in the metabolome is attributable to changes in the microbes. Right? In reality, there's probably some sort of more complicated feedback loops going on, right? Like some metabolites influence the microbes, the microbes also produce metabolites. But we're just trying to see how much we can explain in this one-direction sense. Okay, this is the code.

Here are some of the outputs you can get. Each panel here, the points are located in the same locations. The only thing that's different are the sizes of the points. Each panel is a multi-dimensional scaling. The points are similar to or they're close to each other if their microbiomes are close to each other. The location just depends on the microbiome, not the metabolome. The size of the points is the amount of that metabolite in that sample. So each panel is a different metabolite. I've taken a subset of metabolites. The size of the points is the abundance of that particular metabolite. And I'm just repeating it where I'm changing the sizes to reflect those metabolites.

The color red is healthy. Green and blue are the two subtypes of IBD. And the thing to notice here, these bottom panels, these have high indirect effects. And what you notice between the red and the blue, right? The sizes of the points are quite different. So what this is saying is there's a difference in the amount of this metabolite between the healthy and the disease groups. And not only is there that difference, it seems to be related to the location on this MDS, right? And since the location on the MDS is only coming from the microbiome, these are exactly those metabolites that are changing in relation to the changes in the microbiome. So it's not just arbitrary change. It's traveling through the microbiome path.

And you can dig a little bit deeper into this. So that's kind of an overall indirect effect across the entire microbiome. We can also tease apart individual species. So here, each x-axis is a different microbe. The y-axis is a metabolite. And this picture should remind you of the cartoon that I showed at the beginning, right? There's no direct effect here—for a given value of the x-axis, the mediator, there's not much change in the healthy versus disease. But you see a really strong relationship between the mediator variable and outcome variable, and the value of the mediator is changing across healthy and disease. So this is exactly what we can have in mind as an indirect effect showing up now in this data integration problem for the microbiome.

And here's a sensitivity analysis. One of those pairs from the previous panel is very sensitive, right? So I add a little bit of confounding and then that effect kind of goes away. But then a couple of the others I find here, they're more robust; even if there's some confounding, it will be okay. Here's a link to the paper and the package. The slides I have on GitHub, and you can run it. All the figures are run in the slides. If you have any questions or want to try this out, just send me a message. I'm happy to take any questions. Thank you. [Applause]