
Effective analysis of modern microbiome data requires careful preprocessing, modeling, and interpretation to detect subtle signals and avoid spurious associations. In this talk, we will discuss how semisynthetic simulation can serve as a sandbox to test candidate approaches. Semisynthetic simulators differ from de novo simulators by being trained on an experimental template, allowing them to better reflect the properties of real-world data, and are an important recent development in statistical methodology for microbiome analysis.  Semisynthetic simulators create a setting that mimics real data while providing realistic ground truth, making them a valuable resource for addressing challenges in microbiome power analysis, methods benchmarking, and reliability analysis. We will describe the core statistical and computational techniques used to build semisynthetic simulators and how competing implementations make trade-offs between generality, faithfulness, scalability, and controllability.  Recognizing that all simulators only approximate reality, we will discuss strategies to evaluate how accurately the simulated data reflect properties of the original data. We also present case studies demonstrating the value of simulation in differential abundance testing, data integration, and mediation analysis. Code for all examples can be found in accompanying vignettes (https://go.wisc.edu/8994yz, https://go.wisc.edu/q32phz). This talk is based on the following articles:
 
Semisynthetic Simulation for Microbiome Data Analysis. Kris Sankaran, Saritha Kodikara, Jingyi Jessica Li, and Kim-Anh Le Cao. Briefings in Bioinformatics (2024). https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbaf051
Multimedia: Multimodal Mediation Analysis of Microbiome Data. Hanying Jiang, Xinran Miao, Margaret W. Thairu, Mara Beebe, Dan W. Grupe, Richard J. Davidson, Jo Handelsman, and Kris Sankaran. Microbiology Spectrum 13, no. 2 (2025). American Society for Microbiology. https://doi.org/10.1128/spectrum.01131-24
Generative Models: An Interdisciplinary Perspective. Kris Sankaran and Susan P. Holmes. Annual Review of Statistics and its Application 10, no. 1 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-statistics-033121-110134