
 Modular software for mediation analysis of microbiome data

 Abstract: Mediation analysis has emerged as a versatile tool for answering mechanistic questions in microbiome research because it provides a statistical framework for attributing treatment effects to alternative causal pathways. Using a series of linked regressions, this analysis quantifies how complementary data relate to one another and respond to treatments. Despite these advances, existing software’s rigid assumptions often result in users viewing mediation analysis as a black box. We designed the multimedia R package to make advanced mediation analysis techniques accessible, ensuring that statistical components are interpretable and adaptable. The package provides a uniform interface to direct and indirect effect estimation, synthetic null hypothesis testing, bootstrap confidence interval construction, and sensitivity analysis, enabling experimentation with various mediator and outcome models while maintaining a simple overall workflow. The software includes modules for regularized linear, compositional, random forest, hierarchical, and hurdle modeling, making it well-suited to microbiome data. Our case study revisits a study of the microbiome and metabolome of Inflammatory Bowel Disease patients, uncovering potential mechanistic interactions between the microbiome and disease-associated metabolites, not found in the original study. In addition to summarizing the package, we will explain the software design patterns that we drew inspiration from and how they could inform reproducible multi-omics integration more generally. A gallery of examples and reference page can be found at https://go.wisc.edu/830110.
